---
title: Special Matrices
sidebar: False
order: 2
categories: [matrices]
---


This list contains a list of real matrices.

<u>Diagonal matrix</u>

A square matrix $D$ is a diagonal matrix if all non-diagonal entries are zero. Any general $3 \times 3$ diagonal matrix would take this form:
$$
D = \begin{bmatrix}
a_{11} & 0 & 0\\
0 & a_{22} & 0\\
0 & 0 & a_{33}
\end{bmatrix}
$$
<u>Identity matrix</u>

An identity matrix is a diagonal matrix all of whose diagonal entries is equal to $1$:
$$
I = \begin{bmatrix}
1 & 0 & 0\\
0 & 1 & 0\\
0 & 0 & 1
\end{bmatrix}
$$
<u>Scalar matrix</u>

A square matrix $S$ is a scalar matrix if it is a diagonal matrix all of whose diagonal entries are the same.
$$
S = \begin{bmatrix}
c & 0 & 0\\
0 & c & 0\\
0 & 0 & c\\
\end{bmatrix} = c \cdot I
$$
Another way of expressing a scalar matrix is to represent it as some constant multiple of the identity matrix.

<u>Lower triangular matrix</u>

A square matrix $L$ is a lower triangular matrix if all entries above the main diagonal are zero. Any general $3 \times 3$ lower triangular matrix would take this form:
$$
L = \begin{bmatrix}
a_{11} & 0 & 0\\
a_{21} & a_{22} & 0\\
a_{31} & a_{32} & a_{33}
\end{bmatrix}
$$
<u>Upper triangular matrix</u>

A square matrix $U$ is an upper triangular matrix if all entries below the main diagonal are zero. Any general $3 \times 3$ upper triangular matrix would take the form:
$$
U = \begin{bmatrix}
a_{11} & a_{12} & a_{13}\\
0 & a_{22} & a_{23}\\
0 & 0 & a_{33}
\end{bmatrix}
$$
Every upper triangular matrix is the transpose of some lower triangular matrix.

<u>Symmetric matrix</u>

A square matrix $S$ is a symmetric matrix if it is equal to its transpose:
$$
S = S^T
$$
Any $3 \times 3$ symmetric matrix can be expressed as follows:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
a & b & c\\
b & d & e\\
c & e & f
\end{bmatrix}
$$
<u>Orthogonal matrix</u>

A square matrix $Q$ is orthogonal if its columns are orthonormal. Another way of defining an orthogonal matrix is to note the following:
$$
Q^TQ = QQ^T = I
$$
