---
title: Products of matrices are similar if one of them is invertible
sidebar: false
order: 14
categories: [inverse, similarity]
---

Let $A$ and $B$ be two matrices such that $B$ is invertible. Then $AB$ and $BA$ are similar.

<hr>

The proof is just one line:
$$
BA = B(AB)B^{-1}
$$
The result also holds if $A$ is invertible instead of $B$. The result naturally holds if both $A$ and $B$ are invertible. 

<hr>

<u>Linear Transformations Perspective</u>

We can view this from the perspective of linear transformations. Let $A$ be the matrix representation of a linear transformation $T$ from $\mathbb{R}^{n} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{n}$ with the standard basis $\beta$ for both domain and co-domain. We have:
$$
A = [T]_{\beta}^{\beta}
$$
Let $\beta_{1}$ represent the columns of $B$ and let $\beta_{2}$ represent the columns of $B^{-1}$. Then, we have:
$$
\begin{aligned}
B &= [I]_{\beta_1}^{\beta}\\\\
&= [I]_{\beta}^{\beta_2}
\end{aligned}\quad \quad \quad \quad \begin{aligned}
B^{-1} &= [I]_{\beta_2}^{\beta}\\\\
&= [I]_{\beta}^{\beta_1}
\end{aligned}
$$
What does $AB$ mean?
$$
AB = [T]_{\beta}^{\beta} [I]_{\beta_1}^{\beta} = [T]_{\beta_1}^{\beta}
$$
$AB$ is the matrix representation of $T$ with basis $\beta_1$ for the domain and $\beta$ for the co-domain, where $\beta_1$ is made up of the columns of $B$. Post-multiplying a matrix $A$ with an invertible matrix just changes the basis of the domain for the corresponding linear transformation. It leaves the underlying transformation unchanged.

What does $BA$ mean?
$$
BA = [I]_{\beta}^{\beta_2} [T]_{\beta}^{\beta} = [T]_{\beta}^{\beta_2}
$$
$BA$ is the matrix representation of $T$ with basis $\beta$ for the domain and $\beta_2$ for the co-domain, where $\beta_2$ is made up of the columns of $B^{-1}$. Pre-multiplying a matrix $A$ with an invertible matrix just changes the basis of the co-domain for the corresponding linear transformation. It leaves the underlying transformation unchanged.